[Music]
Good day, I'm Norman Wildberger, and today we're
going to talk about Leonard Euler and pentagonal
numbers. Euler was the greatest mathematician of
the modern age. Originally Swiss, he spent a lot
of his life in Germany and in Russia, in St.
Petersburg. He lived in the time 1707 to 1783,
during which he contributed to almost all branches
of mathematics and established foundational
notation, many important theorems, and in fact,
discovered entire new branches of mathematics.
Today we're going to look at how he interpreted
the pentagonal numbers that we talked about in the
previous video and connected them in a remarkable
way with number theory. So I remind you that the
pentagonal numbers are the sequence here, and by
looking at the table of differences for these,
we were able to extend these pentagonal
numbers also to sort of negative values.
The formula for the pentagonal numbers was n
times (3n - 1) over 2, and last time I posed
the question of whether these numbers over
here, sort of fictitious pentagonal numbers,
play an important role. Euler showed
that they did. He considered putting
the proper pentagonal numbers together with
these other ones into a single sequence,
and he observed that the differences formed
by this sequence were rather irregular and
did not have an easily understood pattern.
Even back then, in the 18th century, Euler
was aware of the importance of looking at a table
of differences. What I've done here is I've just
circled in green the proper pentagonal numbers
that actually come from geometrical figures.
Now let's take a little diversion to a little bit
of elementary number theory, and I would explain
to you an important function of a natural number
called Sigma(n), which is the sum of the divisors
of n. So a divisor of a natural number like 6
is another natural number that divides it. Six
has divisors 1, 2, 3, and 6 itself, and Sigma of
6 is defined to be the sum of all these divisors,
which in this case is 12. Here's a table of the
values of the Sigma function for a natural number
n. It's a rather interesting pattern which
doesn't have a clear structure. We can see
the primes reflected by the fact that if you take
a prime like 7, then its Sigma will be 1 more than
it because it only has two factors: 1 and itself.
Also, 6 has the rather remarkable property that
its Sigma is exactly 2 times it. That's what is
known since ancient times as a perfect number.
Alright, so there's n, there's Sigma(n), and
a natural question is how could you calculate
this? How could you extend this table without
actually factoring a number and counting up
the sum of all of its divisors? Euler discovered a
beautiful way of doing just that. Euler discovered
a recursive formula for the Sigma function, which
means that the values for any particular n can be
expressed in terms of values for smaller natural
numbers. Here's the relation that he found:
Sigma of capital N could be written
as a sum of Sigmas of smaller numbers,
explicitly Sigma of (n - 1) plus Sigma of (n -
2) minus Sigma of (n - 5) minus Sigma of (n - 7),
and so on. What are these numbers that are
appearing here that we're subtracting from n? They
are exactly the generalized pentagonal numbers in
the sequence we wrote down on the previous slide:
1, 2, 5, 7, 12, 15, 22, 26, and so on. There's
also the issue of sign—some of them are plus and
some of them are minus. Well, the rule that Euler
stated was that if you look at the pentagonal
number that you're considering subtracting,
that's called P_n. If that n is an odd number,
then Euler says we put a plus sign in front, and
if n is an even number, we put a negative sign in
front. In the sum, there are only a finite number
of terms because we agree that the Sigma function
is only defined for terms with positive values.
So once what's inside here becomes negative,
we ignore it. There's one more convention that
if we end up with a Sigma of 0 as the last term,
we must interpret Sigma of 0 as equaling
n, the number that we started with.
Alright, so let's illustrate by calculating Sigma
of 12. So we subtract 1, so there's Sigma of 11.
We subtract 2, Sigma of 10. We subtract 5 with
a minus sign. We subtract 7 with a minus sign.
We subtract 12 with a plus sign. Twelve minus
twelve is zero, so this Sigma of 0 has to be
interpreted as the number 12. These ones here
we can look up in the table if we have all the
values up to 11. Sigma of 11 is 12. Sigma of 10
is 18. Sigma of 7 is 8. Sigma of 5 is 6. So the
formula says that Sigma of 12 is the sum of these
things, which is 28, and that is indeed correct.
This Sigma function is, in fact, a very
interesting and important number theoretical
function, and I can't resist throwing in
a fascinating aside discovered relatively
recently by Professor Jeffrey Lagarias
from the University of Michigan in 2002.
I've mentioned the Riemann hypothesis in an
earlier video. I didn't tell you what it was;
it's rather complicated if you set it out in
the traditional way. So here is his equivalent
formulation of the Riemann hypothesis. It's
essentially that this inequality is true for
any natural number. What does it say? It says
that Sigma(n), the sum of the divisors of n,
is less than or equal to H_n plus log of
H_n times e to the H_n. What is H_n? It's
this rational number here: the sum of all the
fractions 1 + 1/2 + 1/3 all the way up to 1/n.
Here's another discovery that Euler made, having
to do with pentagonal numbers. It concerns another
function called the partition function, which
plays an important role in combinatorics. Alright,
so without going into a lot of detail,
let me just say rather quickly that P(n)
is the number of ways to partition a natural
number n. By that I mean, here's an example:
P(4) is 5 because if we partition four, group
four into blocks, each block consisting of
a natural number, then here are the ways we
can do it. We can write it as 4, or as 3 + 1,
or as 2 + 2, or as 2 + 1 + 1, or as 1 +
1 + 1 + 1, and those are the five ways of
partitioning 4. So we say that P(4) is 5. This
partition function is an important function in
computer science and other things, and it's also
rather hard to compute. Euler discovered, again,
a remarkable recursive formula for the
partition function, and it turns out that
it's essentially the exact same recursive
formula that holds for the function Sigma.
So for example, P(14)—to evaluate that, you
take 14 minus 1, 14 minus 2, 14 minus 5,
14 minus 7, 14 minus 12. You put plus signs
and minus signs in front just as we did before,
and then you evaluate these ones which you assume
you already know. There's what they happen to be,
and if we calculate that, we get 135,
telling us that the next term would
be 135 without actually having to
partition 14 into all possible ways.
This becomes a much more efficient way
of calculating the partition function,
and it's still to this day probably one of the
best ways of calculating the partition function.
Next time I want to talk about
another aspect of baby algebra,
which is very important for public
school and high school mathematics:
the issue of identities. I hope you'll join me for
that. I'm Norman Wildberger. Thanks for listening.
[Music]